## Project Proposal

### Abstract
The goal of my project is to explore Oscar award winners, and specifically to see if a machine learning model can learn to predict what movies, actors/actresses will win awards based off a variety of features associated with the person's role or movie. The overall approach of my work will be three fold (ideally). The first will be data cleaning, I have found a dataset of past Oscar winners dating up until 2020 and while the dataset has a ton of useful information it needs to be cleaned for my work. A second and more optional piece of my project would be to conduct data analysis on the cleaned dataset in order to see if there are notable trends in the Oscar winners datasets, are the award winners selected in a biased way? The third piece of the work would be the model training and analysis itself. I would like to complete some form of classification using the model (classifying a specific Oscar nominee as either an award winner or not) I think this could be complete with either logistic regression or with a more advanced model that we might have not learned about too in-depth yet (this could be trying to learn more about SVMs). I will consider this project successful if I am able to train a model that can predict Oscar winners on a testing set with an accuracy about 60-70% (which might be on the conservative side of things), but if that is not achievable I would also consider the data analysis portion of my project successful if I'm able to deduce some form of bias in the Oscar winners.

### Motivation and Question
The Oscars are such an eye catching event and every year there is some major controversy surrounding who wins an award and why. The dataset I have found from [MengtingWan](https://github.com/MengtingWan/oscar/tree/master/data) would make for an interesting exploration into what specific features of a movie/person might influence why they win an Oscar and if any such features exist. In addition, the exploration of the dataset would also open the window to exploring any bias that exists within the determination of who wins an Oscar. With the award being the highest possible achievement in acting and with movies having such a large social impact it's important to make sure the representation and celebration of different groups is fair.

### Planned Deliverables
Following the suggestions by professor Chodrow, the deliverables for my project are simple. I would like to produce a Python package that conatains all the source code used for my algorithms and data analysis as well as data cleaning. I think I could also supply my cleaned dataset as another deliverable separate from the other source code. The last deliverable I would like to provide is a Jupyter notebook that contains my feature experimentation, model training and analysis, as well as my possible analysis of the dataset. Though that is a lot of information to break down so this could be broken into multiple notebooks.

"Full Success" of these deliverables would look like a complete python package that contains source code for a successful prediction algorithm, complete code for model/data analysis, complete code for data cleaning and dataset production. A jupyter notebook that includes well documented feature experimentation, model training using features decided upon during experimentation, analysis of the trained model, data visualization of the model results, as well as a notebook whether the initial data analysis/formatting is completed.

"Partial Success" of these deliverables would look like a python package with full code for data formatting/cleaning, code for an algorithm that can be run on the dataset, but might not produce the most significant classification results, and code for model analysis that accurately gauges the success/accuracy of the model. Jupyter notebooks show an exploration of training features, but documentation might not be the most clear or features weren't chosen in a clear way. Notebooks should also include an element of data visualization and final analysis of the model performance.

### Resources Required
This project will require a training dataset but I have already found one from [MengtingWan](https://github.com/MengtingWan/oscar/tree/master/data). The dataset is fairly large and has many features so there is a chance I need better computing power during model training, but I don't think that will fully be the case. I think the only other resource I will really need is knowledge/guidance with feature extraction and how best to prepare such a large dataset for model training and perhaps which model would be best to use.

### What You Will Learn
Through working on this project and especially if I'm able to complete this project on my own, I will deeply build up my skills in both the ###Theory### and ###Implementation### areas, which have been two of my main areas of focus since the beginning of this class. By implementing an algorithm from the ground up specific for my training task I hope to become much more confident with model training and algorithm development. I also think that this process will help me grasp the theory behind many machine learning algorithms more deeply.

### Risk Statement
Two main things that could stop me from achieving the full deliverables I described earlier are the data not being trainable or the pattern I hope to find in the data not existing. The other piece would be if the dataset I have collected turns out to be too complicated to boil down into a trainable set. From what I have looked over already it seems complex, but not impossible to clean up for a simpler model training step. However, if I'm unable to clean up the data or the data doesn't have an observable pattern then I will be at risk.

### Ethics Statement
I think there is a chance this project could benefit actors/actresses that are members of minority groups. My assumption is that historically Oscar awards have been plagued with bias and by making a model that can confirm that or can point to specific factors that are being weighted more heavily than others, in a hypothetical world the awards could be altered so the way the winners are chosen is done in a more fair/equitable way. This could give minority groups more representation in films in the future and give actors/actresses in minority groups more notoriety/prestige which could perhaps improve social perception.

This project very clearly targets people involved in the film industry and those not involved in that industry could be left behind from this model. However, I think film and other media has a huge impact on social life and if more diverse films get awarded Oscars that gives more people incentive to see them leading to possibly greater representation of minority groups and more chance for everyday people to feel seen and represented.

It might be a bit of a stretch but as I was getting at in my last two answers I think a world with more representation from people of differing backgrounds would make the world a better place. Not only with the members of the minority groups that are receiving more representation feel empowered, but there would also be more exposure to different cultures and opportunities leading to an overall richer society.

### Tentative Timeline
In the next three weeks I would like to have a working data acquisition/cleaning pipeline and to have begun conducting and ideally have finished an analysis of my dataset. During the three weeks following that I would like to have conducted model training/algorithm development and to have finished with an analysis of my model as well as visualization my data and the results of my model's prediction capabilities.
